Complete Project Plan — AI Handwriting Generation System

Phase 1 — Understand Your Data
Do this yourself, no code yet.
Open your collected PNG files manually and look at them. Ask yourself:

Are the strokes clean or noisy?
Are characters centered or off-center?
Is the background pure white?
Do all 62 characters exist?

This step sounds simple but it builds your intuition about what the model will actually see. Most beginners skip this and then wonder why training fails.

Phase 2 — Build Your Dataset Class (Pure PyTorch)
Goal: Write a Python class that loads your images and labels from scratch.
Do this yourself:
Start by writing a simple script that:

Walks through your dataset folder
Reads each PNG filename
Parses the character label from the filename
Builds a list of (image_path, label) pairs
Prints the first 10 to verify

Then upgrade it to a proper PyTorch Dataset:

Inherit from torch.utils.data.Dataset
Implement __len__ and __getitem__
In __getitem__: load image → convert to tensor → normalize to [-1, 1]
Build a label-to-index dictionary manually (don't use any library for this)
Test it with a DataLoader

You will understand after this:

How PyTorch loads data
How images become tensors
What normalization actually does and why


Phase 3 — Preprocessing Pipeline
Goal: Clean and prepare every image before training.
Write each step yourself as a separate function:

Resize — bring every image to 128×128 using PIL
Grayscale — convert RGB to single channel
Normalize — pixel values from [0,255] to [-1,1]
Binarize — threshold so background is pure black, strokes are pure white
Center the character — find the bounding box of the stroke, crop it, pad it back to 128×128 so the character sits in the middle
Augmentation — write functions for:

Random rotation ±5 degrees
Slight elastic distortion
Random slight scaling



After each step: save a sample image and look at it. Don't move to the next step until the output looks correct visually.
You will understand after this:

Why preprocessing matters
What your model actually sees as input
How augmentation artificially expands your dataset


Phase 4 — Build the Style Encoder
Goal: A CNN that takes a handwriting image and outputs a style vector.
Build it yourself layer by layer:
Start with just 2 conv layers and get them working:

Conv2d → BatchNorm → ReLU → MaxPool
Conv2d → BatchNorm → ReLU → MaxPool
Flatten
Linear → style vector of size 128

Then expand to 4 conv layers.
After each layer: print the tensor shape to confirm dimensions are what you expect.
Test it: pass one image through and confirm you get a vector of size 128 out.
You will understand after this:

How CNNs extract features
What BatchNorm and ReLU actually do
How spatial dimensions shrink through pooling


Phase 5 — Build the Character Embedding
Goal: Convert a character label into a vector.
Do this yourself:
Option 1 (start here): One-hot encoding

If you have 62 characters, a one-hot vector is just a 62-dimensional vector
All zeros except a 1 at the index of the target character
Write this from scratch with pure Python/numpy first, then convert to tensor

Option 2 (upgrade later): Learnable embedding

torch.nn.Embedding(62, 64) — maps each character index to a 64-dim vector
This gets trained alongside the rest of the model

You will understand after this:

How categorical data is represented for neural networks
What an embedding actually is


Phase 6 — Build the Fusion Module
Goal: Combine style vector + character vector into one condition vector.
Do this yourself:
This is simpler than it sounds:

Take style vector (128-dim)
Take character embedding (64-dim)
Concatenate them → 192-dim vector
Pass through a Linear layer → 256-dim condition vector

Test it: pass fake vectors of the right sizes through and confirm output shape.
You will understand after this:

How multi-modal inputs are combined
Why concatenation works as a fusion strategy


Phase 7 — Build the Generator
Goal: Takes the condition vector + noise → outputs a 128×128 handwritten character image.
Build it yourself layer by layer:
The Generator works in reverse of the Encoder — it upsamples:

Take condition vector (256-dim) + noise vector (100-dim) → concatenate → 356-dim
Linear layer → reshape to (512, 4, 4) — this is your starting spatial tensor
ConvTranspose2d → (256, 8, 8)
ConvTranspose2d → (128, 16, 16)
ConvTranspose2d → (64, 32, 32)
ConvTranspose2d → (32, 64, 64)
ConvTranspose2d → (1, 128, 128)
Tanh activation at the end (outputs values in [-1, 1])

After each layer: print shapes to verify.
You will understand after this:

How transposed convolutions upsample
Why Tanh is used at the output
How noise + condition together drive generation


Phase 8 — Build the Discriminator
Goal: CNN that looks at an image and decides real or fake.
Build it yourself:

Input: 128×128 image + condition vector (concatenated as extra channels or appended)
Conv2d → LeakyReLU (no BatchNorm in first layer)
Conv2d → BatchNorm → LeakyReLU
Conv2d → BatchNorm → LeakyReLU
Conv2d → BatchNorm → LeakyReLU
Flatten → Linear → single output (real/fake score)
Sigmoid at the end

Important: Use LeakyReLU not ReLU in the Discriminator. Understand why — LeakyReLU prevents dead neurons when gradients are small.
You will understand after this:

How binary classification works in GANs
Why Discriminator and Generator have different activation functions


Phase 9 — Write the Training Loop
Goal: Train Generator and Discriminator together.
Write this yourself step by step:
First understand the GAN training logic conceptually:

Discriminator wants to correctly label real images as real and fake images as fake
Generator wants to fool the Discriminator into labeling its fakes as real
They take turns updating

Then write the loop:
For each epoch:
  For each batch:

    Step 1 — Train Discriminator:
      - Get real images from dataset
      - Generate fake images using Generator
      - Compute D_loss on real images (label = 1)
      - Compute D_loss on fake images (label = 0)
      - Total D_loss = real_loss + fake_loss
      - Backprop and update Discriminator only

    Step 2 — Train Generator:
      - Generate fake images
      - Pass through Discriminator
      - G_loss = how much Discriminator was fooled (label = 1)
      - Backprop and update Generator only

    Step 3 — Log losses every 50 batches
    Step 4 — Save sample generated images every epoch
Use: BCELoss for both, Adam optimizer for both (lr=0.0002, betas=(0.5, 0.999))
After every epoch: look at the saved sample images. You should see them improving.
You will understand after this:

How adversarial training works
Why two separate optimizers are needed
How to read GAN loss curves


Phase 10 — Generate Characters from Text
Goal: Type any text, get handwritten images out.
Write this yourself:

Load your trained Generator weights
Take input text string: "Hello World"
Split into individual characters: ['H','e','l','l','o',' ','W','o','r','l','d']
For each character:

Get character embedding
Get style vector from one of the user's reference images
Generate image using Generator
Save as numpy array


Handle spaces: insert a blank white strip
Concatenate character images horizontally to form a word

You will understand after this:

How inference differs from training
How to use a trained model in practice


Phase 11 — Page Stitching
Goal: Arrange words into lines and lines into a page.
Write this yourself using PIL:

Set A4 page size: 2480×3508 pixels (300 DPI)
Set margins: 200px on each side
Set line height: 150px
For each word:

Place it at current x position
If it doesn't fit on the line, move to next line


Add slight random vertical jitter per character (±3px) for naturalness
Add ruled lines in light blue behind the text

You will understand after this:

How post-processing turns model output into a real document
Why spacing and layout matter for realism


Phase 12 — PDF Export
Goal: Save the final page as a PDF.
Do this yourself:
Use PIL and ReportLab:

Save the stitched page as a high-resolution PNG first
Then convert to PDF using ReportLab or PIL's save with PDF format
Test that it opens correctly and looks clean


Phase 13 — Evaluation
Goal: Measure how good your results are.
Do this yourself:

Visual comparison — print real vs generated side by side
Show samples to someone who doesn't know which is real
If possible compute FID score (Frechet Inception Distance) — measures how similar generated images are to real ones statistically
Plot your training loss curves for Generator and Discriminator


Phase 14 — Final Report
Document every phase above with:

What you did
What problems you faced
How you solved them
Results and sample outputs
Honest reflection on what worked and what didn't


Timeline Suggestion
WeekPhase1Phase 1, 2, 32Phase 4, 5, 63Phase 7, 84Phase 9 (training)5Phase 10, 11, 126Phase 13, 14

Start with Phase 1 today — open your PNG files and just look at them. Everything else builds from there.